==========================
Apache Configuration Files
==========================

:Author: Graham Dumpleton
:Contact: grahamd@dscpl.com.au
:Updated: 24/03/2005

.. contents:: 


This article provides instructions on how to configure Apache to make
use of Vampire.


Enabling Use Of Vampire
=======================

To enable use of Vampire in its mode as an enhanced dispatch system for
basic content handlers, add the following Apache directives into the main
server configuration file.

::

  <Directory /some/directory>
    SetHandler python-program
    PythonHandler vampire
    PythonDebug On
  </Directory>

Substitute "/some/directory" with the name of the actual directory
containing the files which are to be managed by Vampire. "The PythonDebug"
directive is recommended during development but should be set to "Off" in a
production system to avoid revealing internal details of any Python code
when an error occurs.

The above will work for both versions 2.7 and 3.1 of mod_python. In version
3.1, the name of the mod_python handler reference has actually been
changed. If you have no need to support older versions of mod_python you
can use "mod_python" instead of "python-program" with the "SetHandler"
directive.

If you are going to enable use of Vampire from within a ".htaccess" file
instead of the main server configuration file, you will not need the
enclosing "<Directory>" tag. In this case the directory the settings apply
to is that in which the ".htaccess" file is located.

::

  SetHandler python-program
  PythonHandler vampire
  PythonDebug On

If using a ".htaccess" file, you will however need to make sure the
"AllowOverride" directive applicable to this directory has at least
"FileInfo" specified. If this isn't specified Apache will reject the
"SetHandler" directive and any request against the directory will result in
an internal server error response. This override ability has to be set
within the main server configuration files.

::

  AllowOverride FileInfo

It is also necessary to ensure that the "MultiViews" option is not enabled
for the directory. This is necessary as otherwise the mod_negotiation
Apache extension will be applied to requests and Apache may as a result
rewrite request URLs that it shouldn't and confuse Vampire.

::

  Options -MultiViews

Finally, it is also recommended that "Indexes" not be enabled for the
directory. If "Indexes" are enabled a remote person would be able to view
what source code files may exist in a directory even if they can't access
the contents of the files themselves.

::

  Options -Indexes

Note that if using the main server configuration file, Vampire should not
be enabled at global scope, nor enclosed only within a "<Location>" tag. If
this were done, the Vampire configuration mechanism will not work correctly
and the general operation of Vampire may also be affected.

After having made any changes to the main server configuration files you
must restart Apache, otherwise the changes will not be picked up.


Fixing Of The Python Path
=========================

When the "PythonHandler" directive is specified for a directory, mod_python
will add that directory to the beginning of the Python module search path.
This can be problematic because it means that if you choose a name for a
resource which matches that of a standard Python module, any code which
attempts to import the standard module may incorrectly pick up the Python
code file corresponding to your resource.

Because Vampire implements its own module loading system which doesn't rely
on "__import__" or on "sys.path", it is highly recommended that the
modification of the Python module search path to include the directory
where "PythonHandler" was applied be disabled. This can be done by using
the "PythonPath" directive to fix the path to the current value of the
Python module search path.

::

  PythonPath 'sys.path'

Note that once this is set for a directory, this fixed path is inherited by
any subdirectories, even those which may set "PythonHandler" to make use of
some extension for mod_python other than Vampire and even if defined in the
scope of a different interpreter. As other systems may depend on the
directory where the "PythonHandler" directive is applied being added to the
path, you should avoid if possible nesting use of different mod_python
extensions within each other.

You may also find that fixing the path cannot be done when using certain
third party templating systems in conjunction with Vampire. This is the
case with the Cheetah templating system, where it generates code which uses
the Python "import" statement that cannot be substituted with alternate
code that makes use of the Vampire module importing mechanism. This fact
means that one also can't benefit in this case from the ability of the
Vampire module importing mechanism to automatically reload modules when the
code is changed.


Default Directory Index
=======================

If using Apache 1.3, setting "DirectoryIndex" to a specific resource to be
used when a directory is accessed works, albeit with the caveat that the
target file must exist. If the resource is actually a virtual resource
created on demand by a content handler, this means one will need to create
a dummy file as a place marker for the resource to ensure that mod_dir
works correctly.

When using Apache 2.0, the "DirectoryIndex" directive does not get applied
at all to directories being managed by a handler such as Vampire. As a
result, Vampire provides its own means of redirecting requests against a
directory to a specific resource. This is enabled by using the
"PythonOption" directive to set a value for the "VampireDirectoryIndex"
option.

::

  PythonOption VampireDirectoryIndex index.html

When using this feature however, unlike the "DirectoryIndex" directive, you
can only specify a single target resource. It is not possible to supply a
list of resources with the first one found being used.

If the version of mod_python being used supports internal redirects within
Apache, that mechanism will be used to redirect the request to the
specified resource. If internal redirects aren't supported by the version
of mod_python being used, then a HTTP redirect response is returned and the
browser is expected to deal with it.

Note that options set using the "PythonOption" directive are inherited by
subdirectories beneath the directory where the option is set. This means
that you do not have to set the option for every single directory, only the
common parent directory. If different subdirectories needed to use a
different resource, then each directory should set "VampireDirectoryIndex"
themselves. If it was necessary to eliminate the inherited value of the
option, it should be set to ".".

::

  PythonOption VampireDirectoryIndex .

It is necessary to use "." as mod_python has a bug in it which doesn't
allow you to unset an option or set it to an empty value.

If using Apache 1.3 and the "DirectoryIndex" directive, there doesn't seem
to be any way at all of disabling it within a subdirectory once set in the
context of a parent directory.

When using default directory index files, you should avoid having any
corresponding handler accept form parameters. This is because form
parameters submitted using the POST method will not survive the internal
redirect performed by Apache to add the trailing slash to a directory.
